I"¥<h1 id="purpose">Purpose</h1>

<p>The purpose of the Assembly Binary Game Project (referred to in this report as
the ‚ÄúABG Project‚Äù) is to provide a hardware substitute for the now defunct
online Cisco Binary Game. The binary challenge was a competition amongst junior
ACES where a tournament is held to see who can achieve the highest score in a
fixed amount of time. The ABG Project aims to allow students to hold this
competition using physical hardware consoles instead of websites like the Cisco
Binary Game, which ultimately ended up being placed behind a paywall. The custom
PCB allows for many ABG consoles to be created for a potential class set for
future ACES students to continue the binary challenge tradition.</p>

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th style="text-align: center">Parts List</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td style="text-align: center">10k Œ© Resistor</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td style="text-align: center">5 x 3904 BJTs</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td style="text-align: center">16 Mhz Crystal Oscillator</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td style="text-align: center">ATMega328P</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td style="text-align: center">2 x 22 pF Capacitors</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td style="text-align: center">8 x Switches</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td style="text-align: center">5 x 7-Segment Displays</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td style="text-align: center">595 Shift Register</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td style="text-align: center">2 x 4511 7-Segment Driver</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td style="text-align: center">2 x 100 nF Capacitors</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td style="text-align: center">DC Jack</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td style="text-align: center">LM7805 Voltage Regulator</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

<p>The ABG Project allowed the undersigned to improve both assembly language skills
and PCB design skills. As the entire project‚Äôs code is written in assembly, the
ABG Project serves as a good introduction to writing complex and fully featured
programs in assembly language. The PCB was also found to be one of the most
complex through hole boards that the undersigned has designed to date, due in
part to the large number of components as well as unique and unfamiliar
components that were used by the undersigned on the PCB, such as transistors.</p>

<h1 id="reference">Reference</h1>

<p><a href="https://www.avrfreaks.net/forum/very-fastsmall-random-number-generator?page=all">Random Number Generator Example 1</a></p>

<p><a href="https://www.avrfreaks.net/forum/random-number-generation-0">Random Number Generator Example 2</a></p>

<p><a href="https://www.avrfreaks.net/forum/i-need-pseudo-random-number-generator-attiny-13">Random Number Generator Example 3</a></p>

<h1 id="procedure">Procedure</h1>

<p>The ABG Project consists of 8 switches for binary number input, seven segment
displays for score and the 8-bit number to create in binary using the input
switches. The displays are driven by two 4511 7-Segment display driver ICs and a
595 shift register, since many of the ATmega328P‚Äôs digital pins are already tied
to other components such as the input switches.</p>

<p>The construction of the ABG Project is comprised of 3 steps; prototyping, PCB
design and programming.</p>

<p>The first and most straightforward step of the ABG Project is the breadboard
prototype. First, 3 common-cathode 7 segment displays were connected to the
outputs of a single 4511 chip. The cathodes of each display are each wired to
one NPN3904 transistor. The base pins of each transistor are connected to PORTB
of the Arduino so that a particular display can be selected in code by blocking
the path to ground for the other two by leaving their transistor base pins low.
The use of transistors allows all 3 displays to be controlled by a single 4511
using POV by switching through the displays showing one digit at a time so
quickly that it appears as one number. The input pins of the 4511 are
sequentially connected to PORTC. This configuration makes displaying a digit as
simple as outputting a value to PORTC. An additional two 7-Segment displays are
used to display the player‚Äôs score. These two displays are connected to the
outputs of another 4511 chip and their cathodes are connected to transistors in
the same configuration as the other 3 displays. The only difference in the setup
of the score displays is that the inputs of the 4511 are not directly connected
to the Arduino, due to a shortage of I/O pins. Instead, the inputs of the 4511
are connected to the first 4 outputs of a 595 shift register, which feeds the
lower nibble of the byte shifted out directly to the 4511. The two transistors
for selection of a score display are still operated directly by the Arduino
connected to PORTC. The final addition to the prototype circuit is an 8-bit DIP
switch, which was connected to PORTD of the Arduino sequentially so that the
byte inputted by the user could be read with a simple call to the in command.</p>
:ET