I"•<h1 id="purpose">Purpose</h1>
<p>The purpose of the 555 timer-based LED matrix animations project (referred to in
this report as the ‚ÄúTBMA project‚Äù) was to demonstrate how a 555 timer could
still be used in the context of microcontrollers, as well as improve programming
skills and understanding of the 595 shift register.</p>

<p>3 key engineering skills were improved upon in the TBMA project:</p>

<p>Programming skills were improved as a result of having to program a smaller
microcontroller with less SRAM and program space to work with, as well as having
to program two daisy chained shift registers to display the desired images on
the LED matrix. Soldering skills were highly improved upon during this project
due to the fact that all of the columns on the half + size breadboard PCB were
utilized in the circuit, thereby requiring an extensive amount of soldering and
leaving little room for error in the soldering process. Circuit skills were also
refined during this project as the project required extensive wiring and
troubleshooting of the circuit and less attention to the code.</p>

<h1 id="reference">Reference</h1>

<p>http://lucidtronix.com/tutorials/40
http://www.protostack.com/blog/2010/05/introduction-to-74hc595-shift-register-controlling-16-leds/</p>

<h1 id="procedure">Procedure</h1>
<p>The TBMA project circuit was made up of 2 595 shift registers, an ATtiny85
microcontroller, a 555 timer and a 8x8 LED matrix. The 555 timer establishes an
astable square wave pulse that is adjustable by a 10k potentiometer. The output
pin of the 555 timer, which emits the pulse, is hooked up to the external
interrupt pin of the ATtiny85. Each time the output pin of the 555 goes high, an
interrupt is triggered that communicates to the ATtiny85 to show the next frame
of the animation. This effectively allows the 555 timer and the user-adjustable
potentiometer to control the framerate of the animations shown on the LED
matrix. An additional three digital I/O pins of the ATtiny85 are hooked to the
data, latch and clock pins of the shift register handling the columns of the LED
matrix. The shift register controlling the rows is daisy- chained to the shift
register controlling the columns of the LED matrix. The daisy-chaining of the
two shift registers gives the ATtiny85 access to 16 new output pins, which
control the 64 total LEDs on the LED matrix through a process in the code called
scanning. The scanning takes place within a function in the code called
displayBitMap(). A bitmap consists of an array that holds 8 bytes. The
displayBitMap() function shifts the binary values from the first byte of the
array into the column shift register and as it is the first byte of the array,
it is shown on the first row of the LED Matrix. The function then turns off the
first row and shifts out the byte to the column shift register to be shown on
the second row. This process continues until each row has been shown once.
Despite one row being enabled at a time, the scanning process takes place so
rapidly that it appears as though all of the individual illuminated rows on the
LED matrix are illuminated simultaneously. This is due to an optical illusion
called persistence of vision. Persistence of vision is an optical illusion
whereby multiple discrete images blend into one. In this case, the individual
illuminated rows on the LED matrix are perceived as one image.</p>

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th style="text-align: center">Parts List</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td style="text-align: center">2 595 Shift Registers</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td style="text-align: center">ATtiny85 Microcontroller</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td style="text-align: center">22k Œ© Resitor</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td style="text-align: center">470 Œ© Resistor</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td style="text-align: center">Light Dependent Resistor (LDR)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td style="text-align: center">NPN 3904 Transistor</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td style="text-align: center">DC Barrel Jack</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td style="text-align: center">9V Power Supply</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td style="text-align: center">Ferrari Model Car</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
:ET